Erin C. McKiernan

OVERVIEW {#overview .unnumbered}
========

In this laboratory practical, students will learn about the basics of
muscle structure and function, and how muscles provide the force to move
the three types of lever system found in the human body. Students will
learn how to record from their skeletal muscles using electromyography,
recording muscles from all three types of lever system. Overall, this
practical will help students understand the biomechanics of the
musculoskeletal system, and how movement is related to electrical
activity in excitable muscle cells.

SPECIFICATIONS {#specifications .unnumbered}
==============

  -------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  **Level of study:**              Undergraduate
  **Degree programs:**             Biology, Physics, Biomedical Physics, others
  **Semester:**                    4th (i.e. 2nd year undergrads)
  **For use in courses:**          Systems Physiology, others
  **Recommended prior courses:**   Molecular & Cellular Biology
  **Duration of practical:**       1-2 hours
  **Setting:**                     Classroom or laboratory
  **Safety considerations:**       None
  **Other indications:**           Wear loose clothing to permit electrode placement
  -------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------

OBJECTIVES {#objectives .unnumbered}
==========

**Before doing this lab you should be able to:**

-   identify and describe the function of different cellular organelles
    and compartments

-   understand the basics of action potential generation at the
    neuromuscular junction

-   understand basic concepts in physics, like work and force

**In this lab you will:**

-   learn how to record electromyograms (EMGs) from skeletal muscles

-   observe and record changes in the EMG when muscles contract and
    relax

-   investigate the effects of changing the speed and force of
    contraction on EMG signals

-   compare and contrast recordings from three different lever systems
    in the body

**After doing this lab you should be able to:**

-   explain the relationship between muscle cell electrical activity and
    muscle contraction

-   understand the basics of EMG recording

-   design further experiments to investigate the activity of different
    skeletal muscles

EQUIPMENT {#equipment .unnumbered}
=========

-   Muscle SpikerBox (Backyard Brains)

-   3 surface electrodes (Backyard Brains or other provider)

-   orange cable with alligator clips to connect electrodes to SpikerBox
    (Backyard Brains)

-   cable to connect SpikerBox to a computer, tablet, or smartphone
    (Backyard Brains)

-   computer or smartphone with free Backyard Brains SpikeRecorder
    software installed

BACKGROUND {#background .unnumbered}
==========

Skeletal muscles provide force to move levers in human body {#skeletal-muscles-provide-force-to-move-levers-in-human-body .unnumbered}
-----------------------------------------------------------

Movements of the human musculoskeletal system are accomplished by sets
of bones, joints, and muscles that work together much like lever systems
[(Open Learning Initiative 2015; OpenStax CNX 2016b)]{.citation
cites="leversOLI openStax2016lever"}. A lever is composed of a rigid rod
or bar (the lever arm) that pivots about a fixed point (the fulcrum) and
can move a load or overcome a resistance when a force is applied. Levers
are grouped into three classes, depending on the relative placement of
the fulcrum, force applied, and the load or resistance (Fig.
[1](#fig:levers)). Class 1 levers have a central fulcrum with the force
applied on one side and the load on the other (e.g., a crowbar). For
class 2 levers, the load is central and the force and fulcrum are on
either side (e.g., a wheelbarrow). For class 3 levers, the force is
applied centrally and the fulcrum and load on are opposing ends of the
arm (e.g. a pair of tweezers is a pair of 3rd class levers).

![The three classes of levers (A-C.) and examples in the human body
(D-F.). M - muscle, F - fulcrum, and R - resistance. Image: Open
Learning Initiative [(Open Learning Initiative 2015)]{.citation
cites="leversOLI"}, CC BY.](figures/levers2.png){#fig:levers}

In the human body, bones act as lever arms and joints as fulcrums. The
force to overcome a resistance or lift a load is provided by the
contraction of skeletal muscles, which are attached to the bones by
tendons [(Open Learning Initiative 2015; OpenStax CNX 2016b)]{.citation
cites="leversOLI openStax2016lever"}. All three classes of levers are
found in the human body, though some are more common than others [(Open
Learning Initiative 2015)]{.citation cites="leversOLI"}. Class 1 levers
are rare, but a few examples do exist, including the bone-joint system
responsible for head flexion and extension (lowering or lifting the
head, respectively; Fig. [1](#fig:levers)D). In this case, the fulcrum
is the joint between the cranium and the first cervical vertebrae. The
load, or resistance, is the weight of the head itself. The force to lift
the head is applied by contraction of skeletal muscles in the neck and
upper back, including the splenius capitis and semispinalis capitis
[(OpenStax CNX 2016a)]{.citation cites="openStax2016axial"}. The lever
arm in this case is not as obvious as in long-bone systems, but is the
cranium itself. A line can be imagined running diagonally from the neck
muscles on the left, up through the cervical joint, and ending at a
point on the cranium above the eye socket.

When a person stands on tip toes, we can see an example of a class 2
lever in the human body (Fig. [1](#fig:levers)E) [(Open Learning
Initiative 2015)]{.citation cites="leversOLI"}. The foot is the lever
arm, the joints between the bones of the foot and those of the toes (the
metatarsophalangeal joints) act as the fulcrum, and the load is the
person's body weight. The force required to lift the body is provided by
contraction of the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles in the back of the
leg.

Class 3 levers are the most common type found in the human body [(Open
Learning Initiative 2015)]{.citation cites="leversOLI"}. The classical
example is the complex formed by the biceps brachii, elbow, and forearm.
In this example, the forearm is the lever arm, the elbow joint is the
fulcrum, and the force required to move the arm upwards (flex) or lift a
load is provided by the bicep.

Skeletal muscle structure {#skeletal-muscle-structure .unnumbered}
-------------------------

To understand how muscles contract, we must first know about their
structure. Skeletal muscles are composed of multiple fascicles, which
are bundles are many smaller muscle fibers surrounded by a layer of
connective tissue (the perimysium) [(OpenStax CNX 2016e)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016muscle"}. In many skeletal muscles, the fascicles are
aligned parallel to one another, running along the length of the muscle
[(OpenStax CNX 2016b)]{.citation cites="openStax2016lever"}. Other
muscles show a circular fascicle arrangement. Some muscles have
fascicles which meet at one attachment point (convergent), while others
feather out from a central tendon (pennate). The arrangement of the
fascicles affects the direction and angle at which the fibers can pull,
and also affects force generation in the muscle [(OpenStax CNX
2016b)]{.citation cites="openStax2016lever"}.

Each muscle fiber is itself composed of many smaller myofibrils,
containing the molecular machinery for contraction [(OpenStax CNX
2016e)]{.citation cites="openStax2016muscle"}. Surrounding the muscle
fiber is the plasma membrane, or sarcolemma. In the sarcolemma are
embedded transmembrane proteins, like ion channels that mediate currents
and permit the generation of muscle action potentials (APs) [(OpenStax
CNX 2016e)]{.citation cites="openStax2016muscle"}. These APs propagate
via invaginations in the sarcolemma, known as tranverse (T) tubules
(Fig. [4](#fig:ttubules)). Positioned right next to the T-tubules is the
sarcoplasmic reticulum, the equivalent of endoplasmic reticulum in
muscle. Here, select channels respond to the changes in voltage
generated by the propagating APs to initiate intracellular events that
activate the contractile machinery [(OpenStax CNX 2016e)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016muscle"}.

![Muscle structure and levels of organization. Top: whole muscle showing
fascicles. Middle: single fascicle showing muscle fibers. Bottom: single
muscle fibers showing myofibrils. Image: OpenStax [(OpenStax CNX
2016e)]{.citation cites="openStax2016muscle"}, CC
BY.](figures/muscleStructure.jpg){#fig:fibers}

The functional contractile unit of skeletal muscle is known as the
sarcomere [(OpenStax CNX 2016e)]{.citation cites="openStax2016muscle"}.
In skeletal muscles, sarcomeres are arranged in series along the length
of the myofibrils. Regular and repeated changes in the density of
particular proteins in the sarcomeres is what give skeletal muscles
their striped, or striated, appearance under a microscope.

![*Left*: Invaginations in the sarcolemma form the T-tubles, flanked by
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). *Right*: Near the SR, proteins are arranged
in sarcomeres. Different zones are delineated within the sarcomere by
the presence and overlap of select proteins and filaments. Image:
OpenStax [(OpenStax CNX 2016e)]{.citation cites="openStax2016muscle"},
CC BY.](figures/T-tubule.jpg){#fig:ttubules}

![*Left*: Invaginations in the sarcolemma form the T-tubles, flanked by
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). *Right*: Near the SR, proteins are arranged
in sarcomeres. Different zones are delineated within the sarcomere by
the presence and overlap of select proteins and filaments. Image:
OpenStax [(OpenStax CNX 2016e)]{.citation cites="openStax2016muscle"},
CC BY.](figures/SRsarcomere.png){#fig:ttubules}

Sliding filament model and length-tension relationship {#sliding-filament-model-and-length-tension-relationship .unnumbered}
------------------------------------------------------

Sarcomeres contain a number of proteins, like titin, which acts as a
"molecular spring" and is important for establishing elasticity and
passive tension in muscles [(Granzier and Labeit 2006)]{.citation
cites="granzier2006giant"}. However, the basis for contraction lies in
the interaction between actin (thin) filaments and myosin (thick)
filaments [(OpenStax CNX 2016c)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016contraction"}. These filaments are arranged in
parallel, with areas of overlap. Myosin can attach to actin via binding
sites in the myosin head region, forming what is called a cross-bridge.
When the head moves, this causes the filaments to slide past one
another, increasing the area of overlap and shortening the sarcomere.
When this happens in multiple sarcomeres along the length of the
myofibril, the myofibril shortens. If the same effect occurs in many
myofibrils within many fascicles, the entire muscle shortens and
produces a contraction. This description of the interaction of the
myosin and actin filaments is called the sliding filament model of
contraction. The steps by which the myosin and actin filaments engage,
slide, disengage, and then reset is collectively called the cross-bridge
cycle [(OpenStax CNX 2016c)]{.citation cites="openStax2016contraction"}
(discussed in more detail below).

![Sliding filament model of muscle contraction. Top: sarcomere in
relaxed muscle. Filaments have areas of overlap, but are not actively
engaged. Bottom: sarcomere in contracted muscle. Myosin heads bind to
actin filaments, move inward toward the M-line, and slide to shorten the
sarcomere. Image: David Richfield [(Richfield 2014)]{.citation
cites="richfieldSarcomere"}, CC
BY-SA.](figures/sarcomere.png){#fig:sarcomere}

There is an optimal, intermediary level of filament overlap that
produces maximal tension in the muscle [(OpenStax CNX 2016d)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016nervous"}. Too little overlap and the filaments
cannot bind and interact; too much overlap and there is no capacity for
additional filament sliding. The relationship between filament overlap
(i.e., the length of the sarcomere) and muscle tension is called the
length-tension relationship, and is shown in Fig.[6](#fig:tension).

![Length-tension relationship in muscle. Maximal tension is produced
when actin and myosin filaments have optimal overlap for sliding, i.e.,
at around 80-120% of the sarcomere's resting length. Image: OpenStax
[(OpenStax CNX 2016d)]{.citation cites="openStax2016nervous"}, CC
BY](figures/lengthTension.jpg){#fig:tension}

Excitation-contraction coupling and cross-bridge cycling {#excitation-contraction-coupling-and-cross-bridge-cycling .unnumbered}
--------------------------------------------------------

How does an action potential (AP) generated at the neuromuscular
junction (NMJ)[^1^](#fn1){#fnref1 .footnote-ref} lead to cross-bridge
cycling within the sarcomeres? In other words, how is excitation coupled
to contraction? The AP propagates from the NMJ down through the
T-tubules to reach the interior of the myofibrils [(OpenStax CNX
2016c)]{.citation cites="openStax2016contraction"}. Within the T-tubule,
the change in voltage activates a voltage-gated calcium channel known as
Ca[~*v*~]{.math .inline}1.1, or the dihydropyridine receptor (DHPR)
[(Schneider and Hernández-Ochoa 2012)]{.citation
cites="schneider2012skeletal"}. The DHPR is mechanically linked to the
ryanodine receptor (RyR) embedded in the membrane of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR). Activation of DHPR causes a conformational change that,
in turn, activates RyR, opening the channel and allowing calcium to exit
the SR down its electrochemical gradient [(Schneider and Hernández-Ochoa
2012)]{.citation cites="schneider2012skeletal"}. This increase in free
intracellular calcium, in turn, permits cross-bridge formation. If
calcium is not present, cross-bridges cannot form because a complex of
tropomyosin and troponin proteins blocks the myosin binding site on the
actin filaments. When calcium binds with troponin, it results in a
conformational change that moves tropomyosin out of the way and allows
myosin and actin to bind [(OpenStax CNX 2016c)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016contraction"}. Once they are bound, the filaments can
slide.

To continue cycling, the myosin and actin filaments must also be able to
unbind and reset their position. This process requires the input of
energy in the form of ATP [(OpenStax CNX 2016c)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016contraction"}. When myosin binds with ATP, it
detaches from actin. Subsequently, the ATP is hydrolyzed and the energy
released is used to move the myosin head back into the "cocked"
position, ready to bind with actin. ADP and one inorganic phosphate
remain attached to the myosin head. Then, myosin binds to actin and
releases the inorganic phosphate. Next, the myosin head releases the ADP
and moves inward in what is called the power stroke, which causes the
actin filaments to slide toward the midline and shorten the sarcomere.
Cross-bridge cycling continues as long as sufficient ATP and calcium are
present. The muscle relaxes when calcium is pumped back into the SR and
is no longer available, thereby allowing tropomyosin to block the
actin-myosin binding site once more [(OpenStax CNX 2016c)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016contraction"}.

**Study question:** How do the molecular details of
excitation-contraction coupling differ in cardiac and smooth muscle,
compared to skeletal muscle?

Muscle fiber responses, summation, and recruitment {#muscle-fiber-responses-summation-and-recruitment .unnumbered}
--------------------------------------------------

The response of a muscle to stimulation depends on the timing and
strength of the stimulus [(OpenStax CNX 2016d)]{.citation
cites="openStax2016nervous"}. If only a brief stimulus occurs, then a
muscle fiber will respond with a single AP and only a short (tens to
hundreds of milliseconds) twitch will be produced. Because the
intracellular events needed to produce a twitch take longer than those
to generate an AP, another AP can arrive before the muscle fiber has
fully relaxed. If this occurs, the second response will add to the
tension already present in the muscle in a process called summation.
Achieving sustained muscle fiber contraction and generating tension
large enough to do work requires the summation of multiple stimulatory
events.

In addition to summation within single muscles fibers, multiple fibers
are activated to achieve whole-muscle contraction. A motor neuron and
all the muscle fibers it sends signals to (innervates) within a muscle
is called a motor unit. Motor units can vary in size, with some motor
neurons innervating few fibers (small unit) and others innervating many
(large unit). Muscles can vary the force they generate depending on the
number and type of motor units that are recruited.

![Muscle responses. *Left:* Tension developed during a twitch resulting
from a single, brief stimulus. *Right:* Multiple stimuli in quick
succession produce summation and increasing tension. If stimulation
frequency is high enough, the responses fuse into tetanus, achieving
maximal tension and smooth contraction. Image: OpenStax [(OpenStax CNX
2016d)]{.citation cites="openStax2016nervous"}, CC
BY.](figures/myogram.jpg){#fig:twitch}

![Muscle responses. *Left:* Tension developed during a twitch resulting
from a single, brief stimulus. *Right:* Multiple stimuli in quick
succession produce summation and increasing tension. If stimulation
frequency is high enough, the responses fuse into tetanus, achieving
maximal tension and smooth contraction. Image: OpenStax [(OpenStax CNX
2016d)]{.citation cites="openStax2016nervous"}, CC
BY.](figures/summation.jpg){#fig:twitch}

Measuring electrical activity of skeletal muscles - electromyogram {#measuring-electrical-activity-of-skeletal-muscles---electromyogram .unnumbered}
------------------------------------------------------------------

To record the electrical activity of muscles we use a technique called
electromyography, and the recordings we obtain are called
electromyograms (EMGs) [(Cavalcanti Garcia and M. Vieira
2011)]{.citation cites="garcia2011surface"}. EMG recording can be done
invasively by inserting electrodes into the muscle of interest, or
non-invasively by using surface electrodes placed on the skin above the
muscle (Fig. [9](#fig:emg)). Electrode insertion has the advantage of
giving 'cleaner' EMG recordings in which the activity of separate motor
units can be distinguished. However, electrode insertion can be painful
and requires sterile conditions to prevent infection, making this type
of recording not ideal for classroom settings. Surface electrodes, in
contrast, can be easily applied to and removed from the skin without
injury. The limitations of this type of extracellular recording include
only being able to record from superficial muscles, and recordings which
often do not allow for the separation of individual motor units
[(Cavalcanti Garcia and M. Vieira 2011)]{.citation
cites="garcia2011surface"}. These limitations are not prohibitive and
are typically outweighed by the benefits of non-invasiveness, but should
be kept in mind when thinking about electrode placement and data
analysis.

One of the most common recording configurations is known as a bipolar
EMG, or a single differential EMG [(Cavalcanti Garcia and M. Vieira
2011)]{.citation cites="garcia2011surface"}. Two surface electrodes are
placed on the skin above the muscle just a few centimeters apart (Fig.
[9](#fig:emg)). By subtracting the signals recorded at the two points
and then amplifying the difference, common signals that may result from
muscles outside the recording site are largely excluded, and
predominantly local changes in activity are recorded. This configuration
thereby decreases muscle cross-talk [(Cavalcanti Garcia and M. Vieira
2011)]{.citation cites="garcia2011surface"}.

![Bipolar EMG recording setup. For simplicity, not all body or recording
components are shown. Image credit: Erin C. McKiernan, CC
BY](figures/emgAmp.png){#fig:emg}

Bipolar surface EMGs can tell us several things about muscle activity
[(Cavalcanti Garcia and M. Vieira 2011)]{.citation
cites="garcia2011surface"}. One is the timing of muscle activation and
relaxation. Most muscles show very little activity at rest. When
activated, we see a noticeable increase in the occurrence of electrical
impulses, as shown in Fig. [9](#fig:emg) (right-hand side). When the
muscle relaxes, these impulses disappear and we record only the baseline
noise. The timing of muscle activity can then be correlated with other
measures. We can also, to some extent, estimate the force or effort
exerted during a contraction. As the subject increases the force of
contraction, we see an increase in both the frequency of electrical
impulses and the signal amplitude. These changes result from two
factors: (1) a higher frequency of firing in already active motor units,
and (2) the recruitment of additional motor units. Remember, we are
recording the activity of multiple motor units. With increasing
contraction force, more motor units are recruited and begin to fire,
their activity sums, and contributes to the frequency and amplitude
increases.

Study questions {#study-questions .unnumbered}
---------------

1.  Where will you need to place the electrodes to record EMGs from a
    class 1, class 2, or class 3 lever system?

2.  Will you be able to record from any muscle you want in each lever
    system? Why, or why not?

3.  How will you know if you have correctly placed the electrodes?

PROCEDURE {#procedure .unnumbered}
=========

Before beginning, make sure you have all the necessary equipment and
have installed the Backyard Brains recording software on your computer
or smartphone. The following steps will guide you in setting up the
equipment and carrying out recordings.

1. Setup EMG recordings {#setup-emg-recordings .unnumbered}
-----------------------

The Backyard Brains Muscle SpikerBox comes fully assembled and ready to
record. All you have to do is connect the battery, cables, and
electrodes.

1.  Connect the 9V battery to its terminals on the Muscle SpikerBox

2.  Connect the black/blue or green cable to the corresponding computer
    or smartphone port on the Muscle SpikerBox; note that the smartphone
    cable is directional, make sure you have the correct end inserted
    into the device

3.  Connect the other end of the black/blue or green cable to your
    computer or smartphone

4.  Connect the orange cable to its corresponding port on the Muscle
    SpikerBox

5.  Place the surface electrodes over the muscle of interest, just a few
    centimeters apart and oriented parallel to the muscle fibers;
    remember, to record each lever type, you will have to change the
    electrode placement between experiments

    -   Class 1 lever - example muscle of interest: splenius capitis

    -   Class 2 lever - example muscle of interest: gastrocnemius

    -   Class 3 lever - example muscle of interest: biceps brachii

6.  Connect each of the red aligator clips on the end of the orange
    cable to one of the surface electrodes; make sure the metal clips do
    not touch and try to avoid entangling the cables

7.  Hold the black aligator clip (reference) in your hand, or connect it
    to another surface electrode on the back of your hand or some other
    area away from the recording site

    ![*Left*: EMG setup with electrodes connected to Muscle SpikerBox.
    (Connection to computer or smartphone not shown.) Image credit:
    Backyard Brains, CC BY
    SA.](figures/muscleSpikerBox.jpg){#fig:emgSetup}

8.  To improve the EMG signal, the area where the electrodes will be
    placed can be cleaned with alcohol prior to placement; wait until
    the area is dry to place the electrodes

9.  Electrode gel can be placed to improve conduction but is often not
    necessary

10. To avoid noise artifacts, ensure that no clothing is touching the
    electrodes or brushing against the cables during recording

2. Test EMG recordings {#test-emg-recordings .unnumbered}
----------------------

1.  Turn on the Muscle SpikerBox by rotating the black wheel switch on
    the side, a green light should turn on; note that electrodes should
    be connected before turning on the device and disconnected only
    after the device is turned off to avoid a nasty noise!

2.  Open the Backyard Brains recording software and explore the controls
    and settings (for more info on software use, see
    [(Brains 2015)]{.citation cites="spikeRecorder"})

    ![Recording software interface. Image credit: Backyard Brains, CC BY
    SA](figures/BBrecorder.png){#fig:recorder}

3.  Snap your fingers near the recording device; if you see a
    corresponding artifact on the screen, this means you are recording
    only audio; to begin recording muscle activity, adjust the settings
    by pressing the 'Config' button (Fig. [11](#fig:recorder)) (see
    [(Brains 2015)]{.citation cites="spikeRecorder"} for more details)

4.  Ask the subject to briefly contract and relax the muscle of interest

5.  Verify that electric potentials are observed during the contraction;
    check your signal to noise rati; if the signal is too small, you can
    adjust the gain by turning the wheel switch to the right

6.  Try saving a recording to your computer or smartphone (format will
    be .wav)

3. Collect your data {#collect-your-data .unnumbered}
--------------------

1.  Make sure EMG is ready to record subject is in resting position

2.  Before the recording begins, have the subject think about the type
    of movement they need to make to activate the muscle of interest,
    e.g., for the gastrocnemius muscle, this will involved standing on
    tip toes, whereas for the splenius capitis, this will involve
    lifting the head

3.  When the subject is ready, press record on the Backyard Brains
    software interface

4.  Instruct the subject to remain relaxed for 3-5 seconds after the
    recording begins, then contract the muscle of interest for 3-5
    seconds, and then relax again for 3-5 seconds

5.  Have the subject repeat the above sequence at least 3 times

6.  Terminate the recordings and save the data to your computer or
    smartphone

7.  EMGs should be saved and exported in .wav format for analysis

8.  Start a new recording to examine the effects of contraction force

9.  Instruct the subject to perform the first contraction with very
    little force, then pause, then perform and second contraction with
    greater force, then pause, and finally perform a third contraction
    with maximal force

10. Terminate the recordings and save the data to your computer or
    smartphone

11. Start a new recording to examine fatigue

12. Instruct the subject to contract the muscle of interest and hold it
    for as long as they can; how long can they hold it? what happens as
    they start to tire? what happens if they use minimal versus maximum
    force?

13. Terminate the recordings and save the data to your computer or
    smartphone

14. Repeat steps 1-13 for each muscle belonging to the three lever
    systems types; subjects should rest for a few minutes between
    recording sessions

15. Remember to label your data so you know to which subject, muscle,
    and experiment type each recording belongs

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS {#acknowledgments .unnumbered}
===============

This work was supported by UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIME PE213817 and PE213219.

::: {#refs .references .hanging-indent role="doc-bibliography"}
::: {#ref-spikeRecorder}
Brains, Backyard. 2015. "Spike Recorder Documentation: Getting Started."
:::

::: {#ref-garcia2011surface}
Cavalcanti Garcia, M. A., and T. M. M. Vieira. 2011. "Surface
Electromyography: Why, When and How to Use It." *Revista Andaluza de
Medicina Del Deporte* 4 (1): 17--28.
:::

::: {#ref-granzier2006giant}
Granzier, H. L., and S. Labeit. 2006. "The Giant Muscle Protein Titin Is
an Adjustable Molecular Spring." *Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews*
34 (2): 50--53.
:::

::: {#ref-guyton2016book}
Guyton, A. C., and J. E. Hall. 2016. *Textbook of Medical Physiology*.
13th ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: Elsevier, Inc.
:::

::: {#ref-leversOLI}
Open Learning Initiative. 2015. "Levers and Movement." In *Anatomy &
Physiology*. Carnegie Mellon University.
:::

::: {#ref-openStax2016axial}
OpenStax CNX. 2016a. "Axial Muscles of the Head, Neck, and Back." In
*OpenStax, Anatomy & Physiology*. Rice University.
:::

::: {#ref-openStax2016lever}
---------. 2016b. "Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle
Arrangement, and Their Lever Systems." In *OpenStax, Anatomy &
Physiology*. Rice University.
:::

::: {#ref-openStax2016contraction}
---------. 2016c. "Muscle Fiber Contraction and Relaxation." In
*OpenStax, Anatomy & Physiology*. Rice University.
:::

::: {#ref-openStax2016nervous}
---------. 2016d. "Nervous System Control of Muscle Tension." In
*OpenStax, Anatomy & Physiology*. Rice University.
:::

::: {#ref-openStax2016muscle}
---------. 2016e. "Skeletal Muscle." In *OpenStax, Anatomy &
Physiology*. Rice University.
:::

::: {#ref-richfieldSarcomere}
Richfield, D. 2014. "Diagrammatic explanation of sliding filament
hypothesis, Medical gallery of David Richfield." *WikiJournal of
Medicine*.
:::

::: {#ref-schneider2012skeletal}
Schneider, M. F., and E. O. Hernández-Ochoa. 2012. "Skeletal Muscle
Excitation--Contraction Coupling." In *Muscle: Fundamental Biology and
Mechanisms of Disease*, 2:811--21. Elsevier.
:::
:::

::: {.section .footnotes role="doc-endnotes"}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  ::: {#fn1}
    Action potential generation at the NMJ is not discussed herein, but
    can be reviewed in Ch. 7 of [(Guyton and Hall 2016)]{.citation
    cites="guyton2016book"}.[↩︎](#fnref1){.footnote-back}
    :::
:::
